In this video, we are going to talk about data types.
When we assign a value to a variable, even if we do
not think much about it, computers
need to know the type of data that they need to
store, if only for allocating enough memory
space throughout the execution of the program.
When we define a variable, some languages need to be
explicitly told what data type
that variable will be for all durations of the program.
These are referred as statically typed languages.
In Python, this is not necessary, and Python
decides by itself the type of variable into
the flow string as it is more convenient through execution.
This makes Python a dynamically typed language.
Let's start first with the type of data that we can encode in Python.
Some basic data types are Integer, Float, String, and Boolean.
Let's see how this works in practice.
If I want to make an integer value, I will just
say a equal to 5, so there is no decimal
part, so that will be an integer.
So, if I ask Python what is the type of the
variable a, it will say the type is an integer.
If I define a variable equal to 3 .1, and then I
ask Python what is the type of b, then the
type will be a float, because it is so, but it has a decimal point.
Even if I put 3 .0, which means like only has an
integer part different from 0, the type
of this number, this variable, is still a float.
Now, I can also put a string value to a variable,
for instance, myString, this is variable name,
and I want this to be equal to the string, hello.
So, it's a string because I'm using quotes to enclose the text.
I'm using single quotes.
I could use double quotes, it's exactly the same.
So, if I ask Python what's the type of the variable
myString, the type is str, which
means string.
If I take a variable, for instance, x equal, and then
I put a number, but I put the number
in quotes, this is not an integer, this is a string
representing the symbol 5, which
is very different from this definition here in which
the variable a store the value 5.
So, if I put here what's the type of x, the type
is a string because I put the symbol
5 in between quotes.
Same thing if I put decimal part, the type is still a string.
And the last type that we are going to use very
often in this course, it's the Boolean
type.
For instance, if I say myExpression, this is the
name of a variable, and the value I
want to put in this expression is equal to the
comparison 3 equal to 2.
So, if I print the result of this, the result is false.
And if I print the type of this variable, the type is bool, which means a Boolean value.
Boolean variables can only have two values, true or false.
Sometimes I can cast or transform a data type into
another, for instance, let's say like
that, let's put casting data types, suppose that
they have a variable which is equal to
5, and this is an integer.
But for some reason, I would like this 5 to be
treated as a floating number, like 5 .0.
So I can say, why don't you take a and transform
it into a floating number, so I can do it
like that, get the value a, transform it into a
floating number, and put the value again
in the variable a.
I can reuse the value, the variable name on the left and on the right.
Remember that this symbol is an assignment symbol,
not an equality, so this is not going
to compare this and this, it's simply going to
compute the expression here and assign
the value in the left hand side.
So now, if I see what's the type of a, the type now is floating.
I can do the other way around, suppose that I have
a value which is 5 .0, which will result
in a type of floating, but I can say I would like p to be an integer.
So I'm going to use the keyword ent to say, give
me the integer part of the value b.
So b now is 5 and not 5 .0, so the type of b is an integer.
If I do this operation with a floating number
which has a non -zero decimal part, for instance,
x equals 3 .2, and I say print the integer part of
x, I'm actually eliminating all the
floating parts, so I'm losing some information.
So you have to be careful when you're casting data types into another.
Sometimes you don't lose information, sometimes you do lose information.
One thing that you can sometimes try to do is,
imagine you have a variable, I'm going
to use again the name x for convenience, which is the value 5.
So this is a string, but suppose that you know that
this string contains an integer number,
and you want to cast the value in that string to that of the integer number.
Then you can do x integer, in this variable name I'm
explicitly saying, oh this x now
has to be an integer, is the integer part, which is
the integer version of the value x,
which was a string.
So if I print the value, and why not with a comma,
I print the type of this, I will get that now
x int is actually the number 5, and the class,
the data type, is an integer.
Okay, so you can do this with the floating as well,
if this was 5 .3, maybe you could say,
can I transform this to a float, okay, and yeah,
because Python is going to try to put
that into a float, and if it succeeds, it will do it.
If it can't, it will give an error.
Now, this is important because sometimes you have a number, which is given as a string,
and actually you can't do arithmetic operations with numbers in a string form.
For instance, what happens if you try to do this?
You get an error, because this is a string, and that's a number,
so Python does not understand that this is actually the number 5.
So you have to tell him that you want to add the number 5,
which comes from the string 5, and then you will be able to get the result.
This happens sometimes when you read files with numbers,
but these numbers get loaded as strings, and you
need to transform all of them into numbers.
We will see an example of this in one of the exercises.
Okay, so we have seen the four basic data types that exist in Python,
which are integers, floating, string, and booleans,
and when we will start actually loading some
libraries, like NumPy or Pandas,
we will start to encounter more complex data types or
data structures that are going to...
We have seen four very basic data types that you can find in Python.
This is going to be useful when we load large data sets,
to identify each of the columns of this data set, which data type it is,
and what type of operation we can perform on them.
And if the data type is maybe not well read, like
for instance integers or floating numbers
being read as strings, we will have to manually or semi -automatically
transform these numbers into something we can operate with.
That's why this is a very important thing to keep in mind.
